=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

[ this is a template for a new perldelta file. Any text flagged as XXX needs
to be processed before release. ]

perldelta - what is new for perl v5.41.7

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document describes differences between the 5.41.6 release and the 5.41.7
release.

If you are upgrading from an earlier release such as 5.41.5, first read
L<perl5416delta>, which describes differences between 5.41.5 and 5.41.6.

=head1 Notice

XXX Any important notices here

=head1 Core Enhancements

XXX New core language features go here. Summarize user-visible core language
enhancements. Particularly prominent performance optimisations could go
here, but most should go in the L</Performance Enhancements> section.

[ List each enhancement as a =head2 entry ]

=head2 New C<:writer> attribute on field variables

Classes defined using C<use feature 'class'> are now able to automatically
create writer accessors for scalar fields, by using the C<:writer> attribute,
similar to the way that C<:reader> already creates reader accessors.

    class Point {
        field $x :reader :writer :param;
        field $y :reader :writer :param;
    }

    my $p = Point->new( x => 20, y => 40 );
    $p->set_x(60);

=head1 Security

XXX Any security-related notices go here. In particular, any security
vulnerabilities closed should be noted here rather than in the
L</Selected Bug Fixes> section.

[ List each security issue as a =head2 entry ]

=head1 Incompatible Changes

XXX For a release on a stable branch, this section aspires to be:

    There are no changes intentionally incompatible with 5.XXX.XXX
    If any exist, they are bugs, and we request that you submit a
    report. See L</Reporting Bugs> below.

[ List each incompatible change as a =head2 entry ]

=head1 Deprecations

XXX Any deprecated features, syntax, modules etc. should be listed here.

=head2 Module removals

XXX Remove this section if not applicable.

The following modules will be removed from the core distribution in a
future release, and will at that time need to be installed from CPAN.
Distributions on CPAN which require these modules will need to list them as
prerequisites.

The core versions of these modules will now issue C<deprecated>-category
warnings to alert you to this fact. To silence these deprecation warnings,
install the modules in question from CPAN.

Note that these are (with rare exceptions) fine modules that you are encouraged
to continue to use. Their disinclusion from core primarily hinges on their
necessity to bootstrapping a fully functional, CPAN-capable Perl installation,
not usually on concerns over their design.

=over

=item XXX

XXX Note that deprecated modules should be listed here even if they are listed
as an updated module in the L</Modules and Pragmata> section.

=back

[ List each other deprecation as a =head2 entry ]

=head1 Performance Enhancements

XXX Changes which enhance performance without changing behaviour go here.
There may well be none in a stable release.

[ List each enhancement as an =item entry ]

=over 4

=item *

XXX

=item *

Code that uses the C<indexed> function from the L<builtin> module to generate
a list of index/value pairs out of an array or list which is then passed into
a two-variable C<foreach> list to unpack those again is now optimised to be
more efficient.

    my @array = (...);

    foreach my ($idx, $val) (builtin::indexed @array) {
        ...
    }

Z<>

    foreach my ($idx, $val) (builtin::indexed LIST...) {
        ...
    }

In particular, a temporary list twice the size of the original is no longer
generated.  Instead, the loop iterates down the original array or list
in-place directly, in the same way that C<foreach (@array)> or
C<foreach (LIST)> would do.

=back

=head1 Modules and Pragmata

XXX All changes to installed files in F<cpan/>, F<dist/>, F<ext/> and F<lib/>
go here. If L<Module::CoreList> is updated, generate an initial draft of the
following sections using F<Porting/corelist-perldelta.pl>. A paragraph summary
for important changes should then be added by hand. In an ideal world,
dual-life modules would have a F<Changes> file that could be cribbed.

The list of new and updated modules is modified automatically as part of
preparing a Perl release, so the only reason to manually add entries here is if
you're summarising the important changes in the module update. (Also, if the
manually-added details don't match the automatically-generated ones, the
release manager will have to investigate the situation carefully.)

[ Within each section, list entries as an =item entry ]

=head2 New Modules and Pragmata

=over 4

=item *

XXX Remove this section if F<Porting/corelist-perldelta.pl> did not add any content here.

=back

=head2 Updated Modules and Pragmata

=over 4

=item *

L<XXX> has been upgraded from version A.xx to B.yy.

XXX If there was something important to note about this change, include that here.

=back

=head2 Removed Modules and Pragmata

=over 4

=item *

XXX Remove this section if F<Porting/corelist-perldelta.pl> did not add any content here.

=back

=head1 Documentation

XXX Changes to files in F<pod/> go here. Consider grouping entries by
file and be sure to link to the appropriate page, e.g. L<perlfunc>.

=head2 New Documentation

XXX Changes which create B<new> files in F<pod/> go here.

=head3 L<XXX>

XXX Description of the purpose of the new file here

=head2 Changes to Existing Documentation

We have attempted to update the documentation to reflect the changes
listed in this document. If you find any we have missed, open an issue
at L<https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues>.

XXX Changes which significantly change existing files in F<pod/> go here.
However, any changes to F<pod/perldiag.pod> should go in the L</Diagnostics>
section.

Additionally, the following selected changes have been made:

=head3 L<perl5416delta>

=over 4

=item *

Added the change note for apostrophes in names being reinstated, which
was delayed by the review cycle.

=back

=head1 Diagnostics

The following additions or changes have been made to diagnostic output,
including warnings and fatal error messages. For the complete list of
diagnostic messages, see L<perldiag>.

XXX New or changed warnings emitted by the core's C<C> code go here. Also
include any changes in L<perldiag> that reconcile it to the C<C> code.

=head2 New Diagnostics

XXX Newly added diagnostic messages go under here, separated into L</New Errors>
and L</New Warnings>

=head3 New Errors

=over 4

=item *

XXX L<message|perldiag/"message">

=back

=head3 New Warnings

=over 4

=item *

XXX L<message|perldiag/"message">

=back

=head2 Changes to Existing Diagnostics

XXX Changes (i.e. rewording) of diagnostic messages go here

=over 4

=item *

XXX Describe change here

=back

=head1 Utility Changes

XXX Changes to installed programs such as F<perldoc> and F<xsubpp> go here.
Most of these are built within the directory F<utils>.

[ List utility changes as a =head2 entry for each utility and =item
entries for each change
Use F<XXX> with program names to get proper documentation linking. ]

=head2 F<XXX>

=over 4

=item *

XXX

=back

=head1 Configuration and Compilation

XXX Changes to F<Configure>, F<installperl>, F<installman>, and analogous tools
go here. Any other changes to the Perl build process should be listed here.
However, any platform-specific changes should be listed in the
L</Platform Support> section, instead.

[ List changes as an =item entry ].

=over 4

=item *

XXX

=item *

The (mostly undocumented) configuration macro C<PERL_STRICT_CR> has been
removed. When enabled (e.g. with C<./Configure -A ccflags=-DPERL_STRICT_CR>),
it would make the perl parser throw a fatal error when it encountered a CR
(carriage return) character in source files. The default (and now only)
behavior of the perl parser is to strip CRs paired with newline characters and
otherwise treat them as whitespace.

(C<PERL_STRICT_CR> was originally introduced in perl 5.005 to optionally
restore backward compatibility with perl 5.004, which had made CR in source
files an error. Before that, CR was accepted, but retained literally in quoted
multi-line constructs such as here-documents, even at the end of a line.)

=item *

Similarly, the (even less documented) configuration macro C<PERL_CR_FILTER> has
been removed. When enabled, it would install a default source filter to strip
carriage returns from source code before the parser proper got to see it.

=back

=head1 Testing

XXX Any significant changes to the testing of a freshly built perl should be
listed here. Changes which create B<new> files in F<t/> go here as do any
large changes to the testing harness (e.g. when parallel testing was added).
Changes to existing files in F<t/> aren't worth summarizing, although the bugs
that they represent may be covered elsewhere.

XXX If there were no significant test changes, say this:

Tests were added and changed to reflect the other additions and changes
in this release.

XXX If instead there were significant changes, say this:

Tests were added and changed to reflect the other additions and
changes in this release. Furthermore, these significant changes were
made:

[ List each test improvement as an =item entry ]

=over 4

=item *

XXX

=back

=head1 Platform Support

XXX Any changes to platform support should be listed in the sections below.

[ Within the sections, list each platform as an =item entry with specific
changes as paragraphs below it. ]

=head2 New Platforms

XXX List any platforms that this version of perl compiles on, that previous
versions did not. These will either be enabled by new files in the F<hints/>
directories, or new subdirectories and F<README> files at the top level of the
source tree.

=over 4

=item XXX-some-platform

XXX

=back

=head2 Discontinued Platforms

XXX List any platforms that this version of perl no longer compiles on.

=over 4

=item XXX-some-platform

XXX

=back

=head2 Platform-Specific Notes

XXX List any changes for specific platforms. This could include configuration
and compilation changes or changes in portability/compatibility. However,
changes within modules for platforms should generally be listed in the
L</Modules and Pragmata> section.

=over 4

=item XXX-some-platform

XXX

=back

=head1 Internal Changes

XXX Changes which affect the interface available to C<XS> code go here. Other
significant internal changes for future core maintainers should be noted as
well.

[ List each change as an =item entry ]

=over 4

=item *

New API functions are introduced to convert strings encoded in UTF-8 to
their ordinal code point equivalent.  These are safe to use by default,
and generally more convenient to use than the existing ones.

L<perlapi/C<utf8_to_uv>> replaces L<perlapi/C<utf8_to_uvchr>> (which is
retained for backwards compatibility), but you should convert to use the
new form, as likely you aren't using the old one safely.

To convert in the opposite direction, you can now use
L<perlapi/C<uv_to_utf8>>.  This is not a new function, but a new synonym
for L<perlapi/C<uvchr_to_utf8>>.  It is added so you don't have to learn
two sets of names.

There are also two new functions, L<perlapi/C<strict_utf8_to_uv>> and
L<perlapi/C<c9strict_utf8_to_uv>> which do the same thing except when
the input string represents a code point that Unicode doesn't accept as
legal for interchange, using either the strict original definition
(C<strict_utf8_to_uv>), or the looser one given by
L<Unicode Corrigendum #9|https://www.unicode.org/versions/corrigendum9.html>
(C<c9strict_utf8_to_uv>).  When the input string represents one of the
restricted code points, these functions return the Unicode
C<REPLACEMENT CHARACTER> instead.

Also L<perlapi/C<extended_utf8_to_uv>> is a synonym for C<utf8_to_uv>, for use
when you want to emphasize that the entire range of Perl extended UTF-8
is acceptable.

There are also replacement functions for the three more specialized
conversion functions that you are unlikely to need to use.  Again, the
old forms are kept for backwards compatibility, but you should convert
to use the new forms.

L<perlapi/C<utf8_to_uv_flags>> replaces L<perlapi/C<utf8n_to_uvchr>>.

L<perlapi/C<utf8_to_uv_errors>> replaces L<perlapi/C<utf8n_to_uvchr_error>>.

L<perlapi/C<utf8_to_uv_msgs>> replaces
L<perlapi/C<utf8n_to_uvchr_msgs>>.

Also added are the inverse functions L<perlapi/C<uv_to_utf8_flags>>
and L<perlapi/C<uv_to_utf8_msgs>>, which are synonyms for the existing
functions, L<perlapi/C<uvchr_to_utf8_flags>> and
L<perlapi/C<uvchr_to_utf8_flags_msgs>> respectively.  These are provided only
so you don't have to learn two sets of names.

=item *

Three new API functions are introduced to convert strings encoded in
UTF-8 to native bytes format (if possible).  These are easier to use
than the existing ones, and they avoid unnecessary memory allocations.
The functions are L<perlapi/C<utf8_to_bytes_overwrite>> which is used
when it is ok for the input string to be overwritten with the converted
result; and L<perlapi/C<utf8_to_bytes_new_pv>> and
L<perlapi/C<utf8_to_bytes_temp_pv>> when the original string must be
preserved intact.  C<utf8_to_bytes_temp_pv> returns the result in a
temporary using L<perlapi>/C<SAVEFREEPV> that will automatically be
destroyed.  With C<utf8_to_bytes_new_pv>, you are responsible for
freeing the newly allocated memory that is returned if the conversion is
successful.

The latter two functions are designed to replace
L<perlapi/C<bytes_from_utf8>> which creates memory unnecessarily, or
unnecessarily large.

=item *

New API functions L<C<valid_identifier_pve()>|perlapi/valid_identifier_pve>,
L<C<valid_identifier_pvn()>|perlapi/valid_identifier_pvn> and
L<C<valid_identifier_sv()>|perlapi/valid_identifier_sv> have been added, which
test if a string would be considered by Perl to be a valid identifier name.

=back

=head1 Selected Bug Fixes

XXX Important bug fixes in the core language are summarized here. Bug fixes in
files in F<ext/> and F<lib/> are best summarized in L</Modules and Pragmata>.

XXX Include references to GitHub issues and PRs as: [GH #12345] and the release
manager will later use a regex to expand these into links.

[ List each fix as an =item entry ]

=over 4

=item *

Declaring a lexically scoped array or hash using C<state> within a subroutine
and then immediately returning no longer triggers a "Bizarre copy of HASH/ARRAY
in subroutine exit" error. [GH #18630]

=item *

C<builtin::trim()> didn't properly clear C<TARG> which could result in
out of date cached numeric versions of the value being used on a
second evaluation.  Properly clear any cached values. [GH #22784]

=back

=head1 Known Problems

XXX Descriptions of platform agnostic bugs we know we can't fix go here. Any
tests that had to be C<TODO>ed for the release would be noted here. Unfixed
platform specific bugs also go here.

[ List each fix as an =item entry ]

=over 4

=item *

XXX

=back

=head1 Errata From Previous Releases

=over 4

=item *

XXX Add anything here that we forgot to add, or were mistaken about, in
the F<perldelta> of a previous release.

=back

=head1 Obituary

XXX If any significant core contributor or member of the CPAN community has
died, add a short obituary here.

=head1 Acknowledgements

XXX Generate this with:

  perl Porting/acknowledgements.pl v5.41.6..HEAD

=head1 Reporting Bugs

If you find what you think is a bug, you might check the perl bug database
at L<https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues>. There may also be information at
L<https://www.perl.org/>, the Perl Home Page.

If you believe you have an unreported bug, please open an issue at
L<https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues>. Be sure to trim your bug down to a
tiny but sufficient test case.

If the bug you are reporting has security implications which make it
inappropriate to send to a public issue tracker, then see
L<perlsec/SECURITY VULNERABILITY CONTACT INFORMATION>
for details of how to report the issue.

=head1 Give Thanks

If you wish to thank the Perl 5 Porters for the work we had done in Perl 5,
you can do so by running the C<perlthanks> program:

    perlthanks

This will send an email to the Perl 5 Porters list with your show of thanks.

=head1 SEE ALSO

The F<Changes> file for an explanation of how to view exhaustive details on
what changed.

The F<INSTALL> file for how to build Perl.

The F<README> file for general stuff.

The F<Artistic> and F<Copying> files for copyright information.

=cut
